so I started my first job as a computer
programmer in my very first year of
college basically as a teenager soon
after I started working writing software
in a company a manager who worked at the
company came down to where I was and he
whispered to me can he tell if I'm lying
there was nobody else in the room can
who tell if you're lying and why are we
whispering
the manager pointed at the computer in
the room can he tell if I'm lying well
that manager was having an affair with
the receptionist and I was still a
teenager
so I whisper shouted back to him yes the
computer can tell if you're lying well I
left but actually the laughs on me
nowadays there are computational systems
that can society emotional states in
even lying from processing human faces
advertisers and even governments are
very interested I have become a computer
programmer because I was one of those
kids craze about math and science but
it's her along the line I'd learned
about nuclear weapons and I'd gotten
really concerned with the ethics of
science I was trouble
however because of family circumstances
I also needed to start working as soon
as possible so I thought to myself hey
let me pick a technical field where I
can get a job easily and where I don't
have to deal with any troublesome
questions of ethics so I picked
computers well hahaha all the lesser on
me nowadays computer scientists are
building platforms that control what a
billion people see every day they're
developing cars that could decide who to
run over they're even building machines
weapons that might kill human beings in
war its SX all the way down machine
intelligence is here we're now using
computation to make all sorts of
decisions but also new kinds of
decisions we're asking questions to
computation that have no single right
answers that are subjective and
open-ended and value-laden
we're asking questions like who should
the company hire which update from which
friend should you be shown which convict
is more likely to Rhea sent which news
item or movie should be recommend it to
people look yes we've been using
computers for a while but this is
different this is a historical twist
because we cannot anchor computation for
such subjective decisions the way we can
anchor computation for flying airplanes
building bridges going to the moon you
know our airplane safer that the birds
sway and fall there we have agreed upon
fairly clear benchmarks and we have laws
of nature to guide us we have no such
anchors and benchmarks for decisions in
messy human affairs to make things more
complicated our software's getting more
powerful but it's also getting less
transparent and more complex recently in
the past decade complex algorithms have
made great strides they can recognize
human faces they can decipher
handwriting they can detect credit card
fraud and block spam and they can
translate between languages they can
detect tumors and medical imaging they
can beat humans in chess and go much of
this progress comes from a method called
machine learning machine learning is
different than traditional programming
where you give the computer detailed
exact painstaking instructions it's more
like you take the system and you feed it
lots of data including unstructured data
like the kind we generate in our digital
lives and the system learns by churning
through this data and also crucially
these systems don't operate under a
single answer logic they don't produce a
simple answer
it's more probabilistic this one is
probably more like what you're looking
for now the upside is this method is
really powerful the head of Google's AI
systems call that the unreasonable
effectiveness of data the downside is we
don't really understand what the system
learned that's its power this is less
like giving instructions to a computer
it's more like training puppy machine
creature we don't really understand or
control so this is our problem it's a
problem when this artificial
intelligence system gets things wrong
it's also a problem when it gets things
right because we don't even know which
is which when it's a subjective problem
we don't know what this thing is
thinking so um consider a hiring
algorithm a system used to hire people
right using machine learning systems
such a system would have been trained on
previous employees data and instructed
to find and hire people like the
existing high performers in the company
sounds good I once attended a conference
that brought together human resources
managers and executives high-level
people using such systems and hiring
they were super excited they thought
that this would make hiring more
objective less bias and given women give
women and minorities a better shot
against biased human managers look human
hiring is white I know I mean in one of
my early jobs as a programmer my
immediate manager would sometimes come
down to where I was really early in the
morning or really late in the afternoon
and she'd say Xena let's go to lunch
they'd be puzzled by the weird timing
it's 4 p.m. lunch why I was broke
it's a free lunch I always went I'd
later realize what was happening
my immediate managers had not confessed
to their higher-ups that the programmer
they hired for a serious job was a teen
girl who wore teens jeans and sneakers
to work I was doing a good job I just
looked
and was the wrong age and gender so
hiring in a gender and race blind way
certainly sounds good to me
but with these systems it is more
complicated and here's why
currently computational systems can
infer all sorts of things about you from
your digital crumbs even if you have not
disclosed those things they can infer
your sexual orientation your personality
traits your political leanings they have
predictive power with high levels of
accuracy remember four things you
haven't even disclosed this is inference
I have a friend who developed such
computational systems to predict the
likelihood of clinical or postpartum
depression from social media data the
results are impressive her system can
predict the likelihood of depression
months before the onset of any symptoms
months before no symptoms there's
prediction she hopes it will be used for
early intervention great but now put
this in the context of hiring but the
human resources managers conference I
approached a high-level manager in a
very large company I said to her look
what if unbeknownst to you your system
is weeding out people with high future
likelihood of depression they're not
depressed now just maybe in the future
more likely what if it's weeding out
women more likely to be pregnant in the
next year or two but aren't pregnant now
what if it's hiring aggressive people
because that's your workplace culture
you can't tell this by looking at gender
breakdowns those may be balance and
since this is machine learning not
traditional coding there is no variable
they're labeled higher risk of
depression higher risk of pregnancy
aggressive guy scale not only do not
know what your system is selecting on
you don't even know where to begin to
look it's a black box that's predictive
power but you don't understand it
what safeguards I asked do you have to
make sure that your black box isn't
doing something shady ah so she looked
at me as if I had just stepped on ten
puppy tails she stared at me and she
said I don't want to hear another word
about this she turned around and walked
away
why did you she wasn't rude it was
clearly what I don't know isn't my
problem
go away that's their look such a system
may even be less biased than human
managers in some ways and it could make
monetary sense but it could also lead to
a steady but stealthy shutting out of
the job market of people with higher
risk of depression is this the kind of
society we want to build without even
knowing we've done this because we turn
decision-making to machines we don't
totally understand
another problem is this these systems
are often trained on data generated by
our actions human imprints well they
could just be reflecting our biases and
these systems could be picking up on our
biases and amplifying them and showing
them back to us while we're telling
ourselves so we're just doing objective
neutral computation researchers found
that on Google women are less likely
than men to be shown job ads for high
paying jobs and searching for
african-american names is more likely to
bring up ads suggesting criminal history
even when there is none such hidden
biases in black box algorithms that
researchers uncover sometimes but
sometimes we don't know can have
life-altering consequences in Wisconsin
a defendant was sentenced to six years
in prison for evading the police you may
not know this but algorithms are
increasingly used in parole and
sentencing decisions he wanted to know
how is this score calculated
it's a commercial black box the company
refused to have its algorithm be
challenged in open court but ProPublica
an investigative nonprofit audited that
very algorithm with what public data
they could find and found that its
outcomes were biased and its predictive
power was dismal barely better than
chance and it was wrongly labeling black
defendants as future criminals at twice
the rate of white criminals and white
defendants so consider this case this
woman was late to picking up her
godsister from a school in Broward
County Florida running down the street
with a friend of hers and they spotted
an unlocked kid's bike and a scooter on
a porch and foolishly jumped on it as
they were speeding off a woman came out
and said hey that's my kids bike they
dropped it they walked away but they
were arrested she was wrong she was
foolish she was also just 18 she had
couple of juvenile misdemeanors
meanwhile that man had been arrested for
shoplifting in Home Depot eighty-five
dollars worth of stuff a similar petty
crime but he had two prior armed robbery
convictions but the algorithm scored her
as high-risk and not him
two years later ProPublica found that
she had not reoffended it was just hard
to get a job for her with a record he on
the other hand did reoffend and is now
serving an eight-year prison term for a
later crime clearly we need to audit our
black boxes and not have him have this
kind of unchecked power
audits are great and important but they
don't solve all our problems
take Facebook's powerful news feed
algorithm you know the one that ranks
everything and decides to show you what
from all the friends and pages you
follow should you be shown another baby
picture a solo note from a acquaintance
an important but difficult news item
there's no right answer
Facebook optimizes for engagement on the
site likes shares comments so in August
of 2014
protests broke out in Ferguson Missouri
after the killing of an african-american
teenager by a white police officer under
murky circumstances the news of the
protests were all over my
algorithmically unfiltered Twitter feed
but nowhere on my facebook was it my
Facebook friends a disabled faceless
algorithm which is hard because Facebook
keeps wanting to make you come under
algorithms control and so that my
friends were talking about it does the
algorithm wasn't showing it to me I
research this and found this was a
widespread problem the story of Ferguson
wasn't algorithm friendly it's not like
above who's going to click on like it's
not even easy to comment on without
likes and comments the algorithm was
likely showing it to even fewer people
so we don't get to see this instead that
week Facebook's algorithm highlight is
this which is the ALS ice bucket
challenge worthy cause
dumped ice water donate to charity fine
but it was super algorithm friendly the
machine made this decision for us well
very important but difficult
conversation might have been smothered
had Facebook been the only channel now
finally these systems can also be wrong
in ways that don't resemble human
systems do you guys remember Watson
IBM's machine intelligence system that
wiped the floor with human contestants
on Jeopardy was a great player but then
for Final Jeopardy
Watson was asked this question its
largest airport is named for a world war
ii hero its second largest for a world
war ii battle
Chicago the trick humans got it right
Watson on the other hand answered
Toronto for a US city category the
impressive system also made an error
that a human would never make a second
grader wouldn't make our machine
intelligence can fail in ways that don't
fit error patterns of humans in ways we
won't expect and be prepared for it'd be
lousy not to get a job once qualified
for what it would triple suck if it was
because of Stack Overflow in some
subroutine in May of 2010 a flash crash
on Wall Street filled by a feedback loop
in Wall Street's cell algorithm wiped
the trillion dollars of value in 36
minutes I don't even want to thank what
error means in the context of lethal
autonomous weapons so yes humans have
always made biases decision makers and
gatekeepers in courts and news in war
they make mistakes but that's exactly my
point we cannot escape these difficult
questions
we cannot outsource our responsibilities
to machines artificial
artificial intelligence does not give us
an get out of ethics free card data
scientist Fred Benenson calls this math
washing we need the opposite we need to
cultivate algorithms suspicion scrutiny
and investigation we need to make sure
we have algorithmic accountability
auditing and meaningful transparency we
need to accept that bringing math and
computation to messy value-laden
human affairs does not bring objectivity
rather the complexity of human affairs
invades the algorithms yes we can and we
should use computation to help us make
better decisions but we have to own up
to our moral responsibility to judgment
and use algorithms within that framework
not as a means to abdicate and outsource
our responsibilities to one another as
human to human machine intelligence is
here that means we must hold on ever
tighter to human values and human ethics
thank you